---
id: 1698567514-python-fp
aliases:
  - python-fp
tags: []
---

# python-fp

## Monads

Design pattern in which pipeline implementation details are abstracted by wrapping a value in a type
providing a single place to add side effects or other logic.

Monads have 3 things:

- a wrapper type
  - like Option, Future, etc
- a wrap function (return, pure, unit)
  - allows entry into Monad ecosystem, wraps a value in the monad
- a run function (bind, flatmap, >>=)
  - runs transformations on monadic values (aka the inner value)


A flatmap essentially says, given a function that returns the wrapper type, unwrap it 
and return the value inside the wrapper type. Instead of a double-wrapped value. 

Think of a list (which is a monad).

Given this function:

`f (a -> [b]): a -> [b]`

`f` returns a list of `b` values. If we `map` over our list, we get a list of lists of `b` values.
Instead, a flatmap will return a list of `b` values. It could be said that `f` takes regular old
`a` and "lifts" it into our `M[b]`. But if we already have an `M[a]`, we still want to apply
functions to it that return `M[b]` values, but we don't want to end up with a `M[M[b]]` value.
So we need to "flatten" the result of the function, hence `flatmap`.

```python
# Our Monad is list[int]
m = [1,2,3]

# `f` takes an int (regular type) and returns a list of ints (aka our monad!)
# it can be said that `f` lifts the int into our monad
def f(a: int) -> list[int]:
  return [a - 1, a, a + 1]

# But what if we map and apply `f` to our monad?
list(map(f, m))

# the result is a list of lists, aka a list[list[int]] or a "double-wrapped" monad
# that means the function is useless to us if we already have a monad... unless we flatten it!
[ [0, 1, 2], [1, 2, 3], [2, 3, 4] ]

def flatmap(f_, m_):
  new_monad: list[int] = []
  for monad in list(map(f_, m_)):
    new_monad.extend(monad)
  return new_monad

# now we can apply the function to our monad and get a list of ints back
flatmap(f, m)

# the result is a list of ints, aka its the original monad type
[0, 1, 2, 1, 2, 3, 2, 3, 4]
```

I think the simplest way to think of flatmap or bind is to first think of function that operates on the wrapped
type and returns a beautiful new monad. But you want to combine (combinator) that monadic value with the already
existing monad. So you unwrap the current monad, apply the function to the inner value, unwrap the function result
and construct a new monad instance with the combined values.


A map is even easier to understand. It operates on the inside type and returns a regular type which the monad will
rewrap for you. What this does, and flatmap too, is it allows you to have business logic or side effects in the
map functions while to the user, they are simply applying transformations to the inner value similar to what they 
would be doing to the inner value if it wasn't wrapped. In fact the applicable functions are just regular functions
totally unaware of the monad context. 

A flatmap function by comparison must be aware of the monad because it returns a monad, so code-wise it is more coupled.


Using map, I can write specific code for specific types, standard stuff I would already be doing BUT I can execute it in
such a way that it is transparent to the user they are using a monad and triggering interesting side-effects. 

# Functors and Monoids

Composing "map" with a.map(b).map(c) or a.map(b.map(c)) is just composition of morphisms in the functor and works for all functors.

What makes a functor a monad is the identity operation (x => Box(x)) and a way of composing the functor itself: e.g. being able to turn
a `Box(Box(x))` into a `Box(x)`. This latter operation is key; you can think if it as a generic "flatten" operation. Lists are a monad because
you can turn any object into a list of just that object `(x => [x])` and you can turn a list of lists into a flat list:

```python
def flatten(outer: List[List[T]]) -> List[T]:
  if len(outer) == 0:
    return []
  return [outer[0]] + flatten(outer[1:])

# ... or with the Box monad:

def flatten(outer: Box[Box[T]]) -> Box[T]:
  return Box(outer.value.value)
```

This "flatten" is the associative operation that makes things like Box, List, etc into monads. The function `x => Box(x)` is a functor that maps every type `X` in the category of the program's types into the type `Box[X]`. But there are other functions that take some type `A` and map it to `Box[B]`. To compose these in a way that satisfies the associativity laws, you need a way to take `a -> Box[b]` and `b -> Box[c]` and get `a -> Box[c]`. This is done through the "bind" operation in a monad, but the secret sauce is that you can write the bind operation as:

```python
def bind(box: Box[A], f: A => Box[B]) -> Box[B]:
  return flatten(box.map(f))
```

To walk this through, the function `f` takes an `A` and returns a `Box[B]`. When you use that in `box.map(f)`, the map function takes the `Box[A]`, and gives
the `A` inside the Box to the function `f`, which returns a `Box[B]`. But the way `map()` is defined, it puts whatever its argument returned into another Box! So the result of `box.map(f)` is a `Box[Box[B]]`. That's why we call `flatten()` on the result, to turn it into just a `Box[B]`.

When we say there's a monoid defined on these endofunctors, on functions that take an instance of some type A and output a Box of some type B, we give the
identity function as x => Box(x), which doesn't alter its argument except for putting it in a Box, and give the way of composing other functions of the
form ``(A -> Box[B]) -> (B -> Box[C]) -> (A -> Box[C])``, which we can do by composing map() calls as long as we `flatten()` the results before shimmying
them along. This is why what Haskell calls the "bind" operation (spelled as the infix operator `>>=`) is called `flatMap()` in a lot of other languages
and libraries: it's doing a `map()`, followed by a `flatten()`, and this combined operation gives you the means to compose functions with type signatures
that look like `A -> Box[B]` and `B -> Box[C]`:

`Box(a).flatMap(a2BoxB).flatMap(b2BoxC) = Box(a).flatMap(a -> a2BoxB(a).flatMap(b2BoxC))`

The reason `x => Box(x)` is the identity in this monoid is that you can put this function in a `flatMap()` anywhere and it won't change the Box that
you're flatMap()-ing:

`Box(a).flatMap(x => Box(x)) = Box(a)`


## More notes on functors

A functor is a way of operating on the content of something without touching the structure.

A natural transformation is a way of operating on the structure of something without touching or looking at the content.

So the statement comes together as follows:

functor scope :: f a -> g b (i.e., any parameterized type to any parameterized type)
endo + functor :: f a -> f b (i.e., any one parameterized type to the same parameterized type) ... said differently,
a monoid in the category of endofunctor


I don’t really like the term monoid because it sounds like something out of quantum field theory when the reality is pretty simple.

The two main characteristics of monoids are associativity and identity. For example, let's consider numbers under addition:

(3 + 2) + 6 = 3 + (2 + 6) (associativity)
100 + 0 = 100 (identity)
0 + 100 = 100 (identity)

Numbers are monoids under addition where 0 is the identity element (adding 0 to a number produces the original number).

Try it with multiplication over numbers and concatenation over lists, since those are also monoids. What’s the identity element in each case?

How about subtraction?

Note that you can't say that numbers (or anything else) are or are not monoids without specifying a binary operation (i.e. an operation with 2 arguments) on them as well. Something may be a monoid under a given operation but not a monoid under a different operation.

