---
id: 2023-10-23
aliases:
  - October 23, 2023
tags:
  - daily-notes
---

# October 23, 2023

Taking some time today to think more deeply on data modeling in general. Given a set of data, how do we model it? I feel most practitioners who find themselves in the position of having design a data model from scratch often take what I would refer to as a bottoms-up approach. A bottoms-up approach means that, after loading data from source systems, they start building their castle brick by brick. They don't know how the castle is going to look when its finished but they can gauge where it might be a good idea to add some bricks. Maybe some more mortar in some places. Maybe some small standalone structure here to appease certain stakeholders. So on and so forth. I find this approach more of a symptom of education and experience than a condition wrought from deep-thought and contemplation on how previous approaches have failed us. There is a general thought that the "old ways" are no longer applicable due to the massive jump in computing power and available technologies. But these thoughts are almost always fully unqualified. They are touted by untenured inexperienced engineers and analysts which makes them quite dangerous if taken at face value. We must always strive to be incredibly diligent in who we lend our minds to. This is not to say we cannot lend our ears or engage in discussion, but the propensity to blindly follow something you can resonate with is a net-negative. Resonance is a nice word. I think people follow whatever they resonate with perhaps in as much of an effort to tend to ones ego as it is to quickly assimilate knowledge. These days we feel pressed for time to assimilate knowledge, but in our field -- we are essentially valued by our knowledge. So there is always this game at play. In order to get a leg up, in order to progress, you have to "get smart" and do it quickly. I don't know if this is the causal point where people jump off the deep end, but its somewhere in the ballpark. Tangentially related is that our field, software and data especially, does not list on job applications, "Must have read Designing Data Intensive Applications", or "Must have read Ralph Kimball's The Data Warehouse Toolkit Second Edition". The statements sound preposterous but at the same time they beckon a question. If you don't have to read to get the job, you need to sound smarter than your peers to get recognized, and there are communities of folks just like you who will happily join you in the echo chamber -- isn't that a ship pointed at an iceberg?


Pragmatic Programmer

We must be wary of software entropy. How do we design systems which lend themselves to weathering the effects of entropy.
